## Title
SharkABC3D: An R Package for Three-Dimensional Marine Spatial Analyses of Abiotic Covariates

## Authors and Affiliations
Jay H. Matsushiba, Rachel M. Aitchison, Wade J. VanderWright, Nicholas K. Dulvy, 

The three-dimensional marine environment in which sharks, rays, and chimaeras live poses a unique challenge for spatial analyses. Most conventional Geographic Information System (GIS) workflows represent space as a two-dimensional plane. This abstraction fails to accurately represent the range of depths and vertical overlap of various marine habitat types. Additionally, fisheries operate at different depths depending on factors like gear type and target species, creating depth-specific patterns of threat exposure that require analyses in 3D volume rather than 2D planes to quantify. Furthermore, there is a growing need for reproducible and easy-to-use methods for conducting these analyses. Therefore, we developed SharkABC3D (Shark ABiotic Covariates in 3-Dimensions), an open-source R package designed to facilitate three-dimensional marine spatial analyses. The SharkABC3D package provides tools and documented workflows for characterizing the abiotic habitat of marine sharks, rays, and chimaeras. Our package provides functions for extracting values from depth-stratified oceanographic rasters within user-defined geographic areas and depth ranges, enabling researchers to work with gridded marine datasets.This package also incorporates tools for calculating three-dimensional overlap between species distributions and fisheries effort. We demonstrate this package’s utility using an example workflow that integrates IUCN Red List species ranges with World Ocean Atlas 2023 climatologies, extracting temperature and dissolved oxygen profiles for 1,213 chondrichthyan species. By making three-dimensional marine analyses accessible and reproducible, Shark3D aims to accelerate research across all sharks, rays, and chimaeras—from abiotic habitat characterization to climate vulnerability to fisheries risk assessment.

Word Count: 239 / 250